---
layout: post
title:  "Who we are"
ref: who-we-are
lang: en
author: "IT Strategy Team"
date: "2019-09-23"
last_modified: "2019-09-23"
---

Making change happen in large organizations is a seemingly insurmountable task and on your own, it is. One must remember that no matter how many books one has, and no matter how confident on is that they have the magic sauce needed to fix a department, you work among thousands of other people, many of which likely feel the exact same as you. To make matters worse, many of your fellow passionate change agent colleagues may be pushing in another direction, equally confident in their approach. So how does one do it?

How does one become the catalyst for change? Does it begin with a new policy or directive, a really compelling blog post (I certainly hope so), or perhaps the right member of the management team? The cheap answer is always "all of the above" and each of these does play a part. However, with few exceptions, or perhaps none, nobody has the power to force entire organizations to accept change. One must also consider that different tools are effective at different levels. For example, a policy or a directive may promote an appetite for change at senior levels though is likely to sway the working level who just wants to get the job done, with or without lengthy documents written in cryptic vagueness suggesting they align with "an IM-IT strategic plan to a Digital Operations Strategic Plan supports this ideal, and acknowledges the need for greater integration in government to deliver on this digital vision, including across functional communities and within teams." Having worked on strategy and closely with senior management for a time now, sometimes we do not realize strategies or recommendations we write would appear vague to others, as to us they are crystal clear. It is this difference of perspective that creates a void that is hard to cross. It is this exact same void that can make it difficult for management to enact change at the working level. A policy may be meaningful for senior management but you're going to have to sell the value of said policy or directive to the working level -- at least this is the reality within a Canadian government organization. Even if a senior manager is sold by a policy the end goal is still to get the working level folk to modify the way they work, and the tools they work with, the align with said initiative. This is further complicated by the sheer amount of documentation produced by central agencies, and then reproduced, modifed, and watered down, at the department level. Any half dedicated employee can find some line from some important document somewhere that justifies the way they want to work. It is fair to conclude then that change is bound with ones ability to change how people work, which is only losely related to some high falootin policy passed by some executive in a central agency. So whether you are a senior manager trying to enact change, or a change agent trying to promote change within the organization, how does one get said change to manifest in the organization?

In the DevOps Handbook they suggest, "[TO-DO: Quote about how to start the DevOps transformation]". Sounds easy enough. In typical Lean/Agile/DevOps fashion the solution is to start small and scale. When the IT Strategy team was first formed that sounded easy enough. We'll write some wicked awesome documents, senior management will sign off, we'll give these devine documents to those doing the work, and bam, DevOps transformation complete. Unfortunately, the story never unfolds like this. Government is built to be stable which as a byproduct translates into resistant to all kinds of change -- both good and bad. It has many ambitious people trying to spurr a wide variety of changes upon the oragnization which is, at the end of the day, responsible for delivering important services to all Canadians, including the most vulnerable among us. Given this however, enacting the changes many of us are loooking for becomes a tricky game to play. Writing the wicked awesome document is easy enough, but then comes the 'official sign-off'. First one submits their document into the accountability diluting machine where one must have a document reviewed by someone, before it can be reviewed by someone more senior, to be reviewed by a committee, before going to 'the final committee'. Along the way, everyone asks that everyone else between here and Mount Doom be consulted, and if the document ever does make it to the "final committee" (whose definition differs depending who you ask), it's likely years after the trend you were trying to promote has gone out of style and so watered down so as to be unrecognizable. All that to say that 'getting official sign off' of impactful change can be a herculean task and even once completed, in and of itself, does not result in the required changes. Not to mention, as we covered above, anyone with a vested interest in not abiding by your new way of doing things will inevitably be able to find some other document that refutes or negates your shiney new document. And to further complicate matters, we still need for this new document to reflect in real changes within the organization. 

That's alright -- few things easy are worth doing. Plan of attack #2 -- quick wins. We shall identify processes that are especially slow and attempt to increase their effeciency. Even if it's not within my team specifically, one can find a process that is known to prevent their team from delivering as quickly as it could. Everyone has heard the phrase 'breaking down silos' echoing throughout their organization and this approach sounds to be a logically way of breaking out of ones silo and identifying quick wins. It checks so many buzz word boxes. It has to work! Step one then becomes identifying which processes are the slowest. To begin, one should find metrics. Upon further inspection, one realizes that when they inquire about metrics they are met with statements akin to, "um, these data are not maintained so they may be a little out of date", or, "we don't collect metrics, we asked for a tool to help us though have no time to procure the tool or configure it". Ignoring this common justification (which DevOps addresses and proposes solutions for, reference the Phoenix Project), one must eventually relent and modify their approach. If one does not have metrics to identify the [constraints](https://www.itchronicles.com/dev-ops/theory-of-constraints-devops/) or bottlenecks in the [value stream](https://itrevolution.com/improve-flow-devops-value-stream/) that's alright, from conversations with colleagues one could just pick some process which is known to be slow by its users. 

Then with all the best intentions one sends e-mails to the respective owner(s) of said process that one is looking to help improve. Inevitably, you will find a host of hard working folk struggling to keep their heads above water as waves upon waves of requests flood their group mailbox. After sending various meeting requests that get postponed time and time again, you eventually meet with said process owner, or owners. One may quickly realize that 'the process' is a hodgepodge of mixed accountabilities, various committees (or as Marc Swartz may define them in War & Peace & IT, Star Chambers), and an establish methodology that the team swears by which was leveraged to create said process. After quoting your favourite podcasts and books on why you know the One True Way, the team suggests you send a follow up e-mail and you could discuss further when the team has the cycles, otherwise to be interpreted as upon the heat death of the universe.

In conclusion, you have tried

1. Getting sign off from senior management
2. Starting small and going for quick wins by 
  - identifying bottlenecks or constraints in the value stream
  - Starting small attempt to improve an existing process

What now? This entire process is one the team has seem time and time again throughout various departments within the Government of Canada. Policies are a good start, though anyone who has read one and attempted to enforce it in the department knows much more is needed. But what can one do? The answer is not necessarily to be the harbinger change for the organization, but rather to enable it.

In all likelihood whatever awesome new ideas you are attempting to push on the organization are already being pushed by fellow travellers within the organization. You're not the only one who listens to those podcasts and reads those books. 

# Step 0: Get out of your bubble! 
Find those working tangentially to you. How does one do this? Get out of your bubble! Make an account on GCConnex, GCCollab, GC Messenger (TO-DO: links), or join one of the Government of Canada committees such as the GC DevOps League or the Agora Open Source committee, or get on Twitter and start following change agents from various departments. You will find there are many change agents floating around the Government of Canada. Chances are there are many of them who work in the same organization as you. I call this step zero as it will help with future steps, though on it's own does not enact change, and that is what we are looking to do. Enact change, not just talk about it. 

# Step 1: Learn the current process
Even if the current process has it's flaws it was likely put in place with signficant time allocated, a framework behind it, and hard work to integrate it into the organization and document it for approval. The least compelling arguement to change something is accompanied with ignorence of the current process or a lack of appreciation of the work that went, and goes into, it. DevOps teaches us that in order to create a fast and responsive organization in a modern organization automation is essential. It may even be the case that the process need not be changed, perhaps there are a few labour intensive steps that could be automated and result in significant gains.

# Step 2: Due diligence: Learn 
Your process may be affecting the processes that some folks spend their entire days working on, say manual approval processes. First it is important to understand what they are doing so that you can make your choice as to the approach you'd like to take -- a red ocean (the hammer approach) or a blue ocean approach (the collaborative approach). For the sake of this article, we shall focus on the blue ocean approach which, within government, we feel is much more likely to succeed, despite the natural appeal of a hammer approach. To begin, start poking around, use your network from Step 0 and identify who is involved with the process and meet with them, or ask for any documentation they have surrounding the process.

## Blue Ocean Approach Example : ITIL Processes for Software Onboarding
Commonly when one pokes around for long enough eventually one may find themselves stumbling upon processes and documents inspiried by ITIL. You likely won't find any highly motivated DevOps change agents waving the ITIL flag though you will see this flag firmly planted in many of the processes one would like to improve. ITIL is widely adhered to and not without reason. If one takes the time to read through a process created using ITIL one will find language that aligns well with new trendy DevOps methodologies. It calls for repeatable and consistent documented steps that produce repeatable results that are logged and have assocaited metrics. If you find yourself trying to improve said process, your script/program has already been mostly written for you in borderline pseudo-code by your ITIL predecessors.

At this point you have your requirements document and you could begin drafing up some wireframes as to how your solution may look and what kind of information it should collect. Next step is to identify where to start. Remember, start small and increment. Do not attempt to automate the entire process -- that will likely be met with either passive or outright resistance from your colleagues currently organizing their days around said process. What would be the easiest subset the automate with the greatest impact?

There are many ways to identify where may be the best place to start. You may already have a good idea through your self identification of the problem, or perhaps through your discussions with your network from Step 0. Whatever problem you identify ensure that it is a very small and very specfic niche problem you are trying to solve. Given that we are opting for the Blue Ocean Approach here we are looking to improve the process, integrate ourselves into it by proposing and demonstrating a better, mutually beneficial, way of doing things. One should be able to sell this as assisting in lightening the load for those who are currently being bombarded by endless work by the existing process. 

### Where to start
One of the faults we have found in ITIL processes is that it calls for one thorough process through which all processes can be funneled with limited modifications. Perhaps an ITIL enthusiast would argue that this could be interpreted so as to allow for a thorough process which itself has built in sub-processes allowing for a more granular treatment of requests. While this may assist in addressing certain problems, it does not seem to be the norm. Rather, it is often the case that simple small inexpensive requests get treated with the same rigour as large costly acquisitions. The opportunity this presents is that identifying quick wins should be simple enough. Find small inexpensive approval processes and start there. A good place to start, for example, could be open source tools. They are exempt from many (though not all) concerns of large expensive purchases, given that more in dept automated analysis can be done (and many tools already exist to assist you in doing, say, license compliance management and security dependency management), and concerns regarding duplicate tools becomes a non-starter. Two common arguments in favour of preventing duplicate tools are cost and overhead to maintain. Cost is the easy one to address, given that they are open source tools you needn't concern yourself with paying for the tools (you should, however, promote your staff to contribute back to the projects they are benefiting from). You do, however, need to concern yourself with license compliance, though there are many automated tools to assist one with this and existing documentation to assist you in choosing tools that leverage licenses acceptable to your organization [TO-DO: Guillaume help!]. As for overhead required to maintain tools that solve the same problem, if one is able to automate the approval process for a specific type of tool, this process could be run daily, ensuring constantly up to date and compliant software (for the technies among you, further improvements one could store approved artifacts in an artifact repository, for example) meaning there is little to no overhead for supporting several tools that perform the same function. However, you do get the benefit of your teams being able to choose the tools that best solve their needs, allowing them to be more productive and happier. With the added by product of using compliant tools rather than the suite of tools they're using without going through the official process.

In conclusion, the approach is to find a subset of tools for which the existing process is likely overkill for. Identify open source ... [TO-DO: Finish writing]

# Step 3: Enable change
Be the change you want to see. If you think a given process is too slow and the folks within said team (or perhaps your own team) don't want to change it, *demonstrate* how it can be improved -- don't just complain it's too slow. Everyone is doing the best they can within the circumstances they find themselves in. Take your solution as far as you can. For example, depending on your skillset 

- Educate yourself as to existing frameworks and methodologies to solve the same problem
- Define a new process
- Find or create a tool to demonstrate the value and efficacy of the new way of doing things
- Host said tool (ensuring there is no protected information)
  - If you have not used your free credits on (AWS)[https://aws.amazon.com/] or (Azure)[https://azure.microsoft.com/] that's a great place to start

# Step 4: Implement change
Start small ... need to finish article, but need to study :)
